leave the yaml at home post (#53)
brigadecore/blog: content/2022-05-19-leave-the-yaml-at-home.md

---
title: "Leave the YAML at Home!"
slug: "2022-05-19-leave-the-yaml-at-home"
description: "Did you know Brigade involves a minimal amount of YAML?"
date: "2022-05-19"
author: "Kent Rancourt"
summary: "We hear people aren't always crazy about YAML. Have you met Brigade?"
---

Hello again, Brigadiers!

We've heard from time to time that people aren't always so crazy about YAML --
and that's putting it nicely. I don't personally harbor such strong anti-YAML

> sentiment, but the critics are out there and as critics are wont to be, they're

Author: https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/wont

Do people not use this? I feel like this is where @bridgetkromhout would be reminding me to use the simplest language I can get away with.

I'm going to rephrase this is as:

> ... but the critics are out there, and as critics often are, they're quite vocal.

> sentiment, but the critics are out there and as critics are wont to be, they're

Reviewer: I use that term but yeah it's not well known for a lot of people

> sentiment, but the critics are out there and as critics are wont to be, they're

Author: @carolynvs I feel better knowing I'm not the only one!!!

> sentiment, but the critics are out there and as critics are wont to be, they're
> quite vocal. If you dare to search for "yaml sucks" in your favorite search

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
sentiment, but critics are out there, and they're quite vocal. If you dare to search for "yaml sucks" in your favorite search
```

Author: Yup.... "wont" is too archaic. Changing.

> engine, you'll find a litany of criticism -- some of it valid. So we thought

Reviewer 2: I think you should briefly describe why some of the criticism is valid. Otherwise, I don't think the `some of it valid` part adds much.

Author: I think I was just trying to neither invalidate nor buy into the (general) criticism of YAML. I don't hate YAML, but I'm sure those who do make some solid points.

I think this comment has actually given me a lot to think about... If I don't actually hate YAML so much, why do I see our minimal YAML as a selling point? I guess my _real_ problem is that I don't see a declarative language as expressive as an imperative one for modeling workflows.

I think I need to sell that idea a little harder without latching on to more generalized anti-YAML sentiment.

  do -- it pairs event subscriptions with worker configuration.

    * The `eventSubscriptions` field uses `source`, `types`, and `qualifiers` to
      describe events of interest. Event gateways and other event sources
      document what sort of events they emit and exactly how to subscribe to
      them. Here, we're interested in three specific event types that originate
      from the Brigade GitHub Gateway (identified by `source:
      brigade.sh/github`)
      _provided_ the gateway qualified the event as being related to the
      [`brigadecore/brigade`](https://github.com/brigadecore/brigade) repository
      on GitHub. (For reference, all events available from that gateway are
      described
      [here](https://github.com/brigadecore/brigade-github-gateway/blob/main/docs/EVENT_REFERENCE.md).)

    * The `workerTemplate` portion of the file describes the worker that should
      handle the events. In this simple case, it only uses the `git.cloneURL`
      field to indicate where project source -- including the script we'd like
      to run -- can be obtained.

This is all the YAML you write! (And, actually, most of this can be generated

> for you with the `brig init` command!)

Reviewer 2: I think the parentheses should go. That seems like a really important point that maybe even deserves a little bit more prominence.

Author: sgtm

For good measure, let's mention that project definitions such as this one can be
submitted to your Brigade API server like so:

```shell
$ brig project create --file project.yaml
```

With this very small bit of YAML out of the way, _everything else you do is with
JavaScript or TypeScript_ -- both of which are enormously popular with developers
and are, we think, superior methods of modeling complex workflows (as compared
to yards and yards of YAML).

Your script can be as simple as:

```javascript
console.log("Hello, World!")
```

> Or could mux events, dispatching them to the correct handler function:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Or could multiplex events, dispatching them to the correct handler function:
```

Author: I think I might end up not using either of these two words...

When I think of muxing/multiplexing, I'm usually thinking of a long-running process like a web server that dispatches concurrent work in-process on the basis of path, header, etc.

Here, the worker isn't long-running. It fires up and handles a _single_ event.

So on a technicality, this probably isn't multiplexing at all, even though it looks and smells like it.

I think I might just go with:

> Or could dispatch an event to the correct handler function:

Reviewer 2: yea, `dispatch` sounds good there 👍

```typescript
import { events, Job } from "@brigadecore/brigadier"

const goImg = "brigadecore/go-tools:v0.9.0"
const srcPath = "/src"
// ...

events.on("brigade.sh/github", "ci:pipeline_requested", async event => {
  const testJob = new Job("test", goImg, event)
  testJob.primaryContainer.command = ["make"]
  testJob.primaryContainer.arguments = ["test-unit"]
  testJob.primaryContainer.sourceMountPath = srcPath
  testJob.primaryContainer.workingDirectory = srcPath

  const lintJob = new Job("lint", goImg, event)
  lintJob.primaryContainer.command = ["make"]
  lintJob.primaryContainer.arguments = ["lint"]
  lintJob.primaryContainer.sourceMountPath = srcPath
  lintJob.primaryContainer.workingDirectory = srcPath

  // ...

  await Job.concurrent(
    testJob,
    lintJob,
    // ...
  ).run()
})

// ...

events.process();
```

In the excerpt above, we respond to `ci:pipeline_requested` events by executing
`make test-unit` and `make lint` concurrently (subject to scheduling
constraints). Each executes in its own container, in its own pod. Those
containers are both based on a `brigadecore/go-tools:v0.9.0` image that's

> pre-loaded with all of our team's most frequently used Go-based tools.

Reviewer 2: just in case people don't know what `Go` refers to:

```suggestion
pre-loaded with all of our team's most frequently used [Go](https://golang.org)-based tools.
```

With JavaScript and TypeScript being
[Turing complete](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turing_completeness) languages,

> the full range of what you can accomplish with Brigade is unbounded. More than
> simply being unbounded, you're free to implement your workflows using everything

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the full range of what you can accomplish with Brigade is unbounded. Within a Brigade script, for example, you're free to implement your workflows using everything
```

those languages have to offer -- use `try`, `catch`, and `finally` to handle
errors, extract your own patterns and preferences into reusable NPM modules, or
consume third-party modules using either `npm` or `yarn` as your dependency
manager. Whenever applicable, Brigade workers will run an `npm install` or
`yarn install` before executing your script!

> With all this power and flexibility at your finger tips, isn't it time you left
> the YAML at home?

Reviewer 2: I think this sounded slightly less like a sales pitch:

```suggestion
With all the power of a full-featured programming language, we think it's time to leave YAML at home and start writing Brigade scripts.
```
